---
layout: post
title: "Why OSSU is emulating a CS education?"
categories: education computer-science
author:
  - 
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nowadays there are many opportunities for people who wants to learn nearly anything. The internet is making such thing possible, and the online learning communities are getting bigger. One of these learning communities is OSSU [^1]. OSSU is providing a free open source education, that is equivalent to Bachelor Degree in Computer Science. They follow The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Curriculum guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in Computer Science [^2]. Hence, they are, as an online learning community, a credible place.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An important question, yet many forget to ask is: Why Computer Science Education; What is the aim of learning Computer Science; Is it to become a good Software Engineer (SE); or to become well rounded in everything related to Computation in general; and if the latter is true, what is the value - intellectual or practical - of gaining such knowledge. These, at least in my opinion, are an important questions that we must consider, before going further in this discussion.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Computer Science scope and hence its definition, is controversial [^3]. But we've to start somewhere. One way of defining a Scientific discipline is to think in terms of questions; what question or set of questions this Scientific discipline is asking and trying to answer. So, a good definition of Computer Science, that i think encompasses what Computer science actually is, is: _Computer Science is a Scientific discipline that tries to answer three fundamental questions; what can be computed; how to compute it; how we know that this is the best way to compute it and why [^4]._

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Accepting this as a definition of Computer Science, we'll start to realize that Computer Science is much more than what is been considered by most people (i.e. non Computer Scientists). Many students enter Computer Science education each year with the false perception that Computer Science is (SE) or worse, is programming. This is one of the most important factors that contribute to the higher rates of dropouts; the false expectations [^5]. People, especially those who didn't have any technical experience in the domain before entering Computer Science education, think of Computer Science as (SE) or a place to learn Programming. (SE) and Programming are side effects of learning Computer Science; however, Computer Science is not the only way to become a (SE) or a good Programmer. In fact, Computer Science is a research discipline; as an education, it is aiming at producing Computer Scientists (i.e. people who are able to carry out research in the field), not (SE) or Programmers. Therefore, a Computer Science graduate is not necessarily a good (SE) or Programmer; more often than not, the opposite is true. This could explain why companies have to train Computer Science fresh graduates who they hire, and why they are complaining all the time that Computer Science education is not preparing the students for the job market. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If this is the case, why big tech companies hunt for Computer Science graduates?<br>
This is an interesting question, that I think _Dr. Charles Severance_ has a good answer and explanation for it [^6]. According to him, big tech companies wants candidates who are ready to be trained and incorporated in their technology stack. Computer Science graduates are the best candidate for the job. But medium and small companies doesn't have enough financial resources compared to big tech companies, and hence, they couldn't afford a two year training plan for a new hire. Therefore, medium and small businesses doesn't restrict their job hunting process to Computer Science graduates; they search for someone who has working experience, someone who can be ready to deliver code as fast as possible. This means that if someone's goal is to be a (SE) or and expert Programmer, Computer Science education, in the formal setting or online, is not the only way. Sometimes, its the wrong way.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OSSU are very clear in defining their aim from providing this educational opportunity, in their summary section they claim:
> [this] is a complete education in computer science using online materials. It's not merely for career training or professional development. It's for those who want a proper, well-rounded grounding in concepts fundamental to all computing disciplines, [...].

This may explain the logic behind OSSU refusal to my proposal of reordering their curriculum by introducing Mathematics a bit later[^7]. Since they are providing Computer Science education as their main aim (its not merely for carrier training or professional development), my proposal to make it more accessible to people who are afraid of Mathematics, is of no value to them, because a computer scientist, by definition, must know and master a great deal of Mathematics. If, on the other hand, someone doesn't have the intellectual capacity or time to master these mathematical concepts, it will become nearly impossible to purse a Computer Science education. In short, OSSU implicitly are saying - and in reality this is the case: If you want to become a Computer Scientist, you need to master a great deal of Mathematics; if, on the other hand, you want to become explicitly a (SE) or a Programmer, and therefore you need not to master a great deal of Mathematics, this is not a place for you. I think they've wrongly interpreted my proposal as making their curriculum accessible for those who wants to become explicitly (SE) or Programmers. To the contrary, my proposal assumes that in the set of people who wants to become Computer Scientists, and are willing to put the time and effort required for this undertaken, there exist people who've the time and intellectual capacity for Mathematics, but had a bad experience learning it; we shouldn't discard those, specially in an _open_ education. This can also explain why OSSU is emulating a formal CS education. Since they're providing mainly a Computer Science education, they are emulating strictly a Computer Science Curriculum requirements, because this is the only known way. I agree with them that this is the _known_ way, but i disagree with them that its the _only_, or the _best_ way. Therefore, I was proposing what I see as the other way.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My discussion with the people at OSSU have lead me to many insights. First, we don't know how to prepare people for Computer Science education; second, formal education and hence the institutions that _emulate_ it are resistant to change in terms of pedagogy techniques, and the organization of the curriculum; third, Computer Science is not the best way if the aim is to become (SE) or an expert Programmer.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emulating formal education in an open source and free setting is a heroic act. No one can deny the importance of such an undertaken. However, we need more experiential educational settings. We need to try new ways of teaching and organizing the Curriculum, and we shouldn't become afraid of change.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finally, I will conclude with a quote from someone who inspired me in many ways; the Educator and American Philosopher Mortimer J. Adler. This quote was directed to people who were responsible for enhancing public education in the United States during the 1970s. But it can also provide a valuable advice for anyone who are concerned with providing an open source, free online education.
> We are on record as holding that unlimited educational opportunity --or, specking practically, educational opportunity that is limited only by individual desire, ability, and need-- is the most valuable service that society can provide for its members. That we don't yet know how to provide that kind of opportunity is no reason to give up the attempt [^8].

---
**References:**

[^1]: https://github.com/ossu/computer-science .
[^2]: https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/assets/education/cs2013_web_final.pdf .
[^3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_science#History .
[^4]: Jeannette, M. W. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33-35.
[^5]: Schefer-Wenzl, Sigrid & Miladinovic, Igor & Bachinger-Raithofer, Sandra & Muckenhumer, Christina. (2024). A Study on Reasons for Student Dropouts in a Computer Science Bachelor’s Degree Program. 391-400. 10.1007/978-3-031-53382-2_38.
[^6]: https://youtu.be/z3o6yEzcnLc?si=jBICUFWGDd1xLeJW .
[^7]: https://github.com/ossu/computer-science/issues/1231 .
[^8]: Adler, M. J., & Van Doren, C. (1972). How to read a book (Rev. and updated ed). Simon and Schuster. p.30.